# Kachemak Bay Submerged Aquatic Vegetation Habitat Suitability Index Model

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is a repository under active development to model habitat suitability indices (HSI) for submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV) including canopy kelp, understorey kelp, and seagrass in Kachemak Bay, Alaska.

### Objectives

-   Create a validated habitat suitability index model for major SAV categories in Kachemak Bay.

-   Provide publicly available data to identify critical SAV types and locations.

### Guiding Questions

-   What is the theoretical total area that canopy kelps, understorey kelps, and seagrass could colonize in the bay?

-   How do HSI values align with past and present observations of seagrass and kelp?

### Current Status

This project is in active development and will change as additional datasets and analyses are included. The primary short-term goals for the project include:

-   Streamline the code volume by reducing duplicated files created for each SAV type to a single reference file (initial code architecture was highly redundant to allow modularity of component SAV parts).

-   Identify additional environmental parameters and datasets relevant to habitat suitability, especially oceanographic parameters including temperature, salinity, and nutrients.

-   Validate all TAM table values with references.

-   Perform model selection and sensitivity analyses on models and submodels to identify the number and identity of parameters that explain the most model variance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Running The Code

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once cloned, the code can by run piecemeal for each SAV group and parameter, or the combined HSI model for each SAV type can be run with the **\*HSI_model.R** code. Or you can run all data prep and models using the **\*HSI_runall.R** code blocks for each SAV. The HSI model for all SAV combined can be run with **31_combined_HSI_model.R.** Alternatively, you can run all the models and submodels using the **32_HSI_runall.R** code block.

| File Prefix | Content                                     |
|-------------|---------------------------------------------|
| 0\*         | directory creation, understorey kelp models |
| 1\*         | canopy kelp models                          |
| 2\*         | seagrass models                             |
| 3\*         | combined SAV models                         |
| 9\*         | additional analyses, scratchpad             |

: Code type by naming prefix convention.

Currently, the initial fetch calculation code is not operational due to an incompatibility between the fetchR package and the current version of R. However, the original fetch map has been placed in each relevant data directory. In this way the model can still be run for each type of SAV, but fetch will not be calculated locally.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Methods

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Data Collection

Existing datasets for Kachemak Bay were identified for the current model and synthesized to provide bathymetry, substrate type, and SAV presence (canopy kelps, seagrass) layers.

### Bathymetry

Bathymetry data were generated by Martin Renner from: NOAA’s National Geophysical Data Center Kachemak Bay DEM for tsunami modeling (NOAA 2010); NOAA essential fish habitat smooth sheets (curated by Mark Zimmerman, NMFS), and GMRTv4.2 (2024). Grids were produced by reprojecting and bi-cubically up-sampling each existing grid where appropriate, and manually filling in all missing values. Some irregularities and artifacts are expected at the boundaries between coverages. Visual inspections were performed to address some issues, but others likely remain.

### Substrate Type

Substrate type data were taken from NCEI archives as a thematic map of benthic habitat classification in Kachemak Bay created by multibeam echosounder data, automated image processing techniques, and on-screen editing (NOAA 2020).

### Fetch

Fetch was calculated from the full bathymetry layer as reference for land and water features using the 'get_fetch()' command in the fetchR package. See the [fetchR](http://cran.nexr.com/web/packages/fetchR/index.html) documentation for details.

### SAV Presence

Both kelp and seagrass presence data were extracted from the AOOS Workspace and included kelp cover polygons of Kachemak Bay for 2000-2002, and seagrass polygons from [????].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## References

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOAA National Geophysical Data Center. 2010: Kachemak Bay, Alaska 1/3 arc-second MHW Coastal Digital Elevation Model. NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information. Accessed [date].

NCCOS Mapping: Seafloor Mapping Products for Kachemak Bay, Cook Inlet, AK, from 2005-07-06 to 2017-07-19. 2020. NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information.

R Core Team (2024). \_R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing\_. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. <https://www.R-project.org/>.

Hijmans R (2024). \_terra: Spatial Data Analysis\_. R package version 1.7-78, <https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=terra>.

Madden CJ, Grossman DH, Goodin KL, Dethier MN. 2005. Coastal and marine systems of North America: framework for an ecological classification standard: version II.

Carrillo, C., S.K. McKay, and T.S. Swannack. 2020. Ecological Model Development: Toolkit for interActive Modeling (TAM). ERDC/TN EMRRP-SR-90. Vicksburg, MS: US Army Engineer Research and Development Center.

Springer YP, Hays CG, Carr MH, Mackey MR. 2010. Toward ecosystem-based management of marine macroalgae—The bull kelp, Nereocystis luetkeana. Oceanography and marine biology. 12;48:1.
